In nearly all computational engineering and physics fields, linear and
non-linear solvers form the core components of modeling and simulation
applications. Recent focus on multiphysics coupling adds additional complexity
to common linear and non-linear systems as solution strategies change when
physical models are coupled. Furthermore, a desire for predictive simulations
to enhance the safety and performance of engineered systems creates a need for
extremely high fidelity computations to be performed for these coupled systems
as a means to capture effects not modeled by coarser methods. In order to
achieve this high fidelity, state-of-the-art computing facilities must be
leveraged in a way that is both efficient and considerate of hardware-related
issues. As scientific computing moves towards exascale facilities, with
machines of O(1,000,000) cores already coming online, new algorithms to solve
these complex problems must be developed to leverage this new hardware. Issues
such as resiliency to node failures and scaling to large numbers of
heterogeneous computing elements (CPUs and GPUs) will be pertinent to robust
algorithms aimed at this new hardware.

A natural path of investigation in addressing these issues would be to analyze
and adapt the existing class of state-of-the-art solvers (Krylov, multigrid,
etc.) in order to make them efficient and resilient on current and future
hardware.  Instead, we pose the question, ``Do algorithms exist that naturally
enable resiliency while preserving accuracy, convergence, and robustness?''
Our objective is to answer this question by proposing a novel group of
stochastic methods to advance solution techniques for linear and non-linear
problems with a focus on resiliency against both hard and soft errors.

The idea of using Monte Carlo methods (random walks) to invert linear systems
is not new.  The earliest referenceable work dates to a 1950 paper by Forsythe
and Leibler.  Their paper credits the idea to unpublished work by J.v. Neumann
and S.M. Ulam dating back to the 1940's.  The basic principles of Monte Carlo
matrix inversion were further elucidated in Hammersley and Handscomb's 1964
text.  These early methods are distinguished by very slow, statistically noisy
convergence properties; thus, they have not made any significant impact in the
linear solver community.

In order to address the convergence issues plaguing Monte Carlo solvers,
Halton proposed a Sequential Monte Carlo method.  This algorithm demonstrated
dramatically improved convergence over regular Monte Carlo.  Nonetheless, this
method has not gained widespread use as a production-quality linear solver.
For many decades, the particle transport community has been utilizing Monte
Carlo methods for the solution of transport problems. The partial differential
equation (PDE) community has focused on various deterministic methods for
solutions to linear problems. In between these two areas are a not widely
known small group of stochastic methods for solving sparse linear systems. In
recent years, we have further developed these methods for transport problems
in the form of Monte Carlo Synthetic-Acceleration (MCSA) that have yet to be
applied to more general sparse linear systems. Compared to other methods in
these regimes, MCSA offers three attractive qualities: (1) the linear operator
need not be symmetric or positive-definite, thereby reducing preconditioning
complexity, (2) parallelization using modern methods developed by the
transport community is possible, and (3) the stochastic nature of the solution
method provides a natural solution to the issue of resiliency.

In addition to linear solver advancements, non-linear solvers may also benefit
from a general and parallel MCSA scheme. In the engineering community,
non-linear problems are often addressed by linearizing the problem and using
traditional iterative or direct methods. In the mathematics community, various
Newton methods have been popular. Recently, Jacobian-Free Newton-Krylov (JFNK)
schemes have been utilized in multiphysics and advanced single physics
codes. The benefits of JFNK schemes are that the Jacobian is never formed,
simplifying the implementation, and a Krylov solver is leveraged (typically
GMRES or Conjugate Gradient), providing excellent convergence properties for
well-conditioned and well-scaled systems. However, there are two potential
drawbacks to these methods for high fidelity predictive simulations: (1) the
Jacobian is approximated by a first-order differencing method on the order of
machine precision such that the error can grow beyond that of those in a
fine-grained system and (2) for systems that are not symmetric
positive-definite (which will be the case for most multiphysics systems and
certainly for most preconditioned systems) the Krylov subspace generated by
methods utilizing a long recurrence relation such as GMRES may become
prohibitively large. To address these issues, this work proposes novel methods
for non-linear systems based on the MCSA method. Although the Jacobian must be
explicitly formed to use MCSA, for problems that take more than a few GMRES
iterations to converge the storage required for the Krylov subspace will
likely grow beyond that of the Jacobian. Finally, using MCSA for the linear
solve provides its benefits for preconditioning, parallelism, and resiliency.
